So I look at the camera? Yes please.
My name is Bilkis. My date of birth is 1st of August 1956.
My name is Bilkis Akhtar Chauhan and I was born on 1st of August 1956.
What is your first memory of you growing up?
In Pakistan we were five brothers and three sisters.
My main memory is the place we lived, the village. There was no running water.
We used to go to the river. It was one of the five rivers by our house.
We used to go to the river to fetch water.
How old were you?
We were five, six, seven. We used to go in the evening because ladies were not allowed to go during the day.
So we used to go with our mothers in the evening.
What are the types of games you remember playing or enjoyed?
We used to play with a ball. It was a game called Shatapu.
I don't know what you call it in English.
It was our neighbor's house. They had a big garden there. So we used to play there.
It goes off every Monday at this time because it's their routine.
We used to play in the streets.
Did you play different types of games?
Not that much because the girls...
Again?
Tell us about the type of things you would do when you were playing in the streets.
That's all I remember. We used to have a PE in school.
School wasn't very far from our house.
I liked going to school. Maths was my favorite subject.
We played with the cousins mostly because we were all in the street or relatives used to live.
So we played with the cousins.
What celebrations or traditions do you remember sharing with families and your cousins and everyone that was around you?
We have two Eids in a year. So Eid was a special time.
Men used to go to read Eid Namaz in the mosque.
Ladies stayed at home. We cooked in the morning. My mom did.
My nanny, my grandmother used to come and help.
When our dad comes back from Eid Namaz, he used to bring balloons.
He gave us money for Eid.
Then we used to go to a sort of Eid Mela.
Over there there were swings and stalls, different types of stalls and swings.
We used to enjoy that.
The second Eid is the Qurbani, when they sacrifice a lamb.
So that was a good time as well.
Why is it important to still have these traditions and celebrations?
Because we're Muslims and that Qurbani is one of the...
In religion, we fast for a month, then we celebrate with the Eid.
So all the family gets together and we have a celebration then.
Again, growing up, what would you say is your favorite memory?
Going to school or going to my khalas' house and play with my cousins.
We used to have a swing on the big tree and we used to swing on that.
Play there.
So then just to flip it on the other side, what do you think about the childhood here in the UK versus Pakistan?
What the childhood for my children.
You can look at your children as an example.
It's totally different, because over there we didn't have that many toys, didn't have that many facilities.
But it's more here. In a way it was better, communication wise it was better there.
But over here, financially you are better off and you have more toys and more things to play with.
And then traveling to the UK, what made you decide to come to the UK?
I didn't decide to come.
I got married. My father passed away.
And in Muslims we do get married without cousins.
So I got married to my cousin.
They came to this country in 1966.
My aunt and my husband, they went back when my father passed away.
So they asked for my marriage and then we got married.
I came after a year then.
So then you came in 1967.
1967.
1960. No, no. My husband's family was here from 1966.
And my dad passed away in 1973.
So what were your expectations of the UK or life in the UK?
I think I was too young to know what I want or what's there.
I got married and came down.
And that was my family then.
That was my uncle and auntie and their children.
I came as a doctor-in-law.
So over there when you get married and you go into the family,
so the daughter-in-law's responsibilities are to look after the house,
the cooking, the cleaning.
How old were you?
Which I found very... I was 18 when I came.
I came in June and I was 18 in August.
I'm sorry, what were you about to say which you found very...
It was difficult, very, very difficult at the time.
Leaving your family there.
And you don't know many people apart from my cousins,
but they were over here since 1965.
So I only seen them when I was about six or seven.
So it was very, very difficult.
What can you say is the most important thing that you had to leave behind?
And how did you feel about it?
The family, leaving behind the family.
And yeah, family mostly.
And culture, over here there was no...
Like nowadays there's television, there's more communication.
But back then it was only half an hour program on the telly, weekly.
Which we used to watch and used to look forward to that program in the morning.
Or there was a mosque there and we used to go to mosque to read Jumma Namaz.
Apart from that I was in the house most of the time.
How did you get to the UK or how did you travel to the UK?
I came by myself because I got married in 1973.
But I had my visa in 1974.
So I travelled by myself.
By plane?
By plane, yeah.
What could you say was the best or the worst thing about that journey?
Best thing was I was excited to come here as well.
As you know I was upset to leave my family.
I was excited to come because my husband did go once again.
Like when I got married he went there.
And then after that about seven, eight months he went back again.
But I didn't have the visa at the time so I couldn't come back with him.
So I came back about three, four months later.
But I was excited to come here.
Because England was England.
So when did you arrive in Newport?
I lived in London for ten years because my in-laws are in London.
So I came to my in-laws house.
We stayed there for ten years.
I didn't stay with my mother in their family house.
Back then, I don't know if you can do it now or not,
back then you used to apply for council flats.
Some of us applied for council flats.
Which we got after about two years, year and a half.
So we moved there.
We stayed there about three years.
Then we bought our own house.
And we moved there.
And by then I had a daughter.
So is this in Newport then?
No, no, it's still in London.
So then yeah, when did you?
1986 I moved to Wales.
I came in 1974 to London.
I moved here in 1986.
What do you recall about the first few days and few months that you were in Newport?
It was nice because we wanted to buy a business.
My husband had a leather factory, making leather garments in London.
My husband and his dad and brothers, they were all in partners.
But the business went down so we were looking for a business.
We went up north first.
On the way back, my husband's friend was living in Newport.
So we came to see him.
And my husband liked the place and said we'll move here.
So we bought a house here first and then we found a business.
What other challenges can you say that you face to really establish yourself in Newport?
Mostly with my children because we moved to Cleon.
Moved in Cleon.
My daughter was 11 and the younger daughter was three and a half.
The younger daughter settled in okay, but the eldest one, she had problems in school.
Racism.
Because there was only three children in the whole of the school at that time.
So she didn't settle properly here.
She didn't like it much.
But the younger one settled okay.
Used to bring them to mosque for religious reading.
Did any of your friends or family join you in the UK?
I came to my in-laws house.
None of my family came here.
Even after, even when you...
They came when my daughter got married recently.
What was that like as well and how do you feel about your children coming to mosque with you and learning about the traditions?
It's important to know your roots and your religion.
So I used to take them to mosque to read Quran and to read Namaz.
Culture wise I missed a lot here because in London there was a bit more than in Newport.
When we were in the Asian area, so there was more things done in cultural wise.
But in Newport at that time it wasn't that much.
And then again we bought the business and busy as well.
What do you love the most about your culture?
Most is getting together.
Getting together on occasions.
So then you spoke about this a little bit.
What parts of the culture have you made to make sure that, to preserve and to keep?
Whether that be the traditions or the customs or the language, food or the festivals.
I think both religious wise I have taken my daughters to mosques to read the Quran.
Culturally we dress up in our traditional dresses whenever we go to see our own families.
Especially on Eid we get together and have our own food.
If you say special food on Eid.
Have you studied here as well?
No.
What about work and jobs?
In London I helped. I knew sewing a bit when I was in Pakistan.
In school we learned sewing.
At home we used to do embroidery and I learned it from my mom.
When I came here my husband and their family was in leather business.
So we had a sewing machine at home.
So I made the lining of the jackets.
That's how I started sewing.
So I made lining for our own factory.
And then I worked for other factories but still at home.
Working from home.
Made skirts, blouses, bright made dresses.
So I've done sewing for at least 10 years.
You're still doing it.
Yeah, still doing it now.
Can you describe how you became a part of or involved in Age of Life?
Age of Life. We had a shop as I said.
We were looking for a business that's why we moved here.
So we had a convenience store.
We had it for 7 years.
Then we had a break for 2 years.
And then we were hoping to sell it but couldn't sell it at the time.
So we had that business back and we went in for another 8 years.
After that my health wasn't that great.
And my husband had a bypass as well.
So we decided to sell the business.
So we sold the business.
As I said my health wasn't that great so I couldn't work for anybody else.
I'd done voluntary work for a couple of years.
And by then I met a few people along the way.
And I came to Age of Life.
Age of Life has given me a lot in a way.
I wasn't that confident to speak to other people, to get involved in different things.
I knew how to work because I worked in the shop.
I knew I could communicate.
But I always found it hard confidence wise.
But since I am in the group my confidence has built up.
And there's something to look forward to every week.
And now I go to people in groups.
I do some voluntary work.
And that's good.
And the other groups have come from you being a part of Age of Life and growing your own confidence.
That's right, growing my own confidence and meeting other people.
They knew for being like a copy and a half.
So we went to copy and a half.
And in copy and a half I met these ladies, Beechwood Stitches.
So I go there.
Which is very good.
And when you think about Age of Life, are there one or two events that stand out for you?
Are there any events?
I like going to trips.
And I like to be in.
That's my best part in the Age of Life is because I'm a committee member as well.
Which I enjoy.
I always like maths in school.
So I enjoy that.
And how do you think Age of Life supports Black or Asian or any other ethnic groups?
We are by getting together and we try our best to involve if we see anybody who we think is lonely or need anybody.
And we always invite them to come to our group.
And lastly, have you kept any kind of family heirlooms, like photographs or ornaments?
Yes.
Why are they important to you?
Photographs are important.
That's your memories.
Somebody said to my daughter the other day,
I like that if your house got fire, what would you take?
She goes, my albums.
So it's a memory.
It's a memory.
And when you look back, I like looking back at all the photographs.
Is there anything you'd like to share?
I don't have much of a talk.
Thank you very much.
I'm sorry.
I didn't say that after you just shared this amazing information.
Thank you very much.
I'll get this now.